When thinking of common job site injuries, usually the first that come to mind are the immediate accidents, the sudden ones that come without warning. Examples of these might be: falling, cuts, fires, tripping, falling objects, collapses, etc.

These injuries are thought of quickly because they can be seen or noticed by all. However, there are other common injuries that occur on job sites that can’t easily be spotted. These are internal damages and one of the most common is Musculoskeletal Disorders (MSD).

OSHA defines this as an injury or disorder of the muscles, nerves, tendons, joints, cartilage and spinal discs. A few well-known examples of this are carpal tunnel syndrome, bursitis and tendinitis.

MSD’s can occur in various parts of the body, but the most-affected area by far is the back. They can be caused by overexertion, awkward postures, improper lifting technique, extreme temperatures, repetitive motion, etc.

Your job description and the way you go about it is unlikely to change, however, there are some ways to avoid Musculoskeletal Disorders.

Preventing Musculoskeletal Disorders
Improved Work Techniques
Figure out the best way to complete a job by keeping the goal of decreasing your risk factors in mind. For example, be sure to utilize helpful equipment such as dollies, carts, forklifts and platforms in order to keep you from injuring yourself.
Proper Stretching
Suggest a work site stretch and flex program. This presents a great opportunity for team bonding and communication while preparing each employee’s body for the work ahead of them.
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)
PPE is designed specifically to reduce the risk of injury. Wearing shoulder and knee pads and vibration-reducing gloves can really make a difference when working for hours at a job site.
Better tools and resources
It’s important to ensure that the hand tool you’re using fits the job you are doing and reduces the applied force. Using the wrong tool can cause immense discomfort and long-term side effects. It’s equally as important to discover how to improve the building resources being used. Can the weight be lightened? Can the packaging be reduced?
Training
Learning about Musculoskeletal Disorders should not happen on the job, but rather before the job. Workers must learn about the risk factors of MSD’s and how to make ergonomic changes in order to prevent them.
One of the biggest mistakes an employee or employer can make is to not be informed about or prepared for an upcoming job.

Don’t make that mistake.

Choose to be prepared. Choose to be informed. Choose to be safe.