Treatment plans can vary depending on your symptoms and the type of cardiovascular disease you have. Cardiovascular disease treatment may include:

Lifestyle changes: Examples include changing your diet, increasing your aerobic activity and quitting smoking or tobacco products (including vaping).
Medications: Your healthcare provider may prescribe medications to help manage cardiovascular disease. Medication type will depend on what kind of cardiovascular disease you have.
Procedures or surgeries: If medications aren’t enough, your healthcare provider may use certain procedures or surgeries to treat your cardiovascular disease. Examples include stents in your heart or leg arteries, minimally invasive heart surgery, open-heart surgery, ablations or cardioversion.
Cardiac rehabilitation:You may need a monitored exercise program to help your heart get stronger.
Active surveillance: You may need careful monitoring over time without medications or procedures/surgeries.
Prevention
How can I prevent cardiovascular disease?
You can't prevent some types of cardiovascular disease, such as congenital heart disease. But lifestyle changes can reduce your risk of many types of cardiovascular disease.

You can reduce your cardiovascular risks by:

Avoiding all tobacco products.
Managing other health conditions, such as Type 2 diabetes, high cholesterol or high blood pressure.
Achieving and maintaining a healthy weight.
Eating a diet low in saturated fat and sodium.
Exercising at least 30 to 60 minutes per day on most days.
Reducing and managing stress.

Your healthcare provider will perform a physical exam and ask questions about your symptoms, personal health and family health history. They may also order tests to help diagnose cardiovascular disease.

What tests might I have for cardiovascular disease?
Some common tests to diagnose cardiovascular disease include:

Blood work measures substances that indicate cardiovascular health, such as cholesterol, blood sugar levels and specific proteins. A provider can use a blood test to check for blood clotting issues as well.
Ankle brachial index (ABI) compares the blood pressure in your ankles and arms to diagnose peripheral artery disease.
Electrocardiogram (EKG) records your heart’s electrical activity.
Ambulatory monitoring uses wearable devices that track your heart rhythm and rates.
Echocardiogram uses sound waves to create an image of your heartbeat and blood flow.
Ultrasound uses sound waves to check blood flow in your legs or neck.
Cardiac computerized tomography (CT) uses X-rays and computer processing to create 3D images of your heart and blood vessels.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) uses magnets and radio waves to create highly detailed images of your heart.
MR angiogram or CT angiogram uses an MRI or CT, respectively, to see blood vessels in your legs, head and neck.
Stress tests analyze how physical activity affects your heart in a controlled setting, using exercise or medications, to determine how your heart responds. This type of test can involve EKGs and/or imaging tests.
Cardiac catheterization uses a catheter (thin, hollow tube) to measure pressure and blood flow in your heart.